okay I'm going back I'm going back this
is an Israeli checkpoint in the occupied
West
Bank a sign of Israel's military control
over the territory since
1967 more than 3 million Palestinians
here face about 700 different obstacles
to their freedom of movement including
checkpoints roadblocks and Gates there's
no other way to call it Bart it's not
only a human rights organization I mean
anyone who looks at the situation on the
ground knows it is
aparte rights organizations say
Palestinians are denied basic civil
rights including that of freedom of
assembly Association and
expression the Oslo Accords signed in
Washington DC in
1993 were supposed to bring about
Palestinian
self-determination the Accords divided
the West Bank into areas a b and c
C area C exclusively for Israelis
constitutes about 60% of the West Bank
and that figure is growing there are up
to 34 of a million Israeli settlers
living in about 250 settlements in
violation of international
law they openly carry weapons often
intimidating attacking and harassing
Palestinians to displace them from their
lands children in the occupied West Bank
are also
targeted Israel is the only country in
the world to prosecute children in
military
courts meanwhile UNICEF says 2023 was
the worst year on record in which
soldiers killed 124
children the UN special rorer an
independent expert responsible for
monitoring human rights in the occupied
territories was recently barred from
entering is Israel franches albeni says
that's been happening for the last 16
years by refusing me entry Israel is
abusing of its powers as an occupying
power so as long as it Remains the
occupying power in the West Bank the
Gaza Strip and is Jerusalem Israel needs
to conform with the rules of the United
Nations recent comments by Israeli Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu point to a
doubling down on its continued military
occupation
I will not compromise on full Israeli
security control of all territory west
of the Jordan River my insistance is
what has prevented over the years the
establishment of a Palestinian
State Israeli raids happen nightly now
nearly 400 Palestinians including more
than a 100 children have been killed in
the occupied West Bank since Israel's
war on Gaza began in October Mike leppel
El jazer
Daniel Le is president of the US Middle
East project and he's a former Israeli
negotiator he's joining us live from
London thank you very much indeed for
being with us uh we've all all that
we've heard uh for the first three hours
of the uh hearings in the international
court of justice in the he has been the
Palestinian delegation putting forward
its case how is Israel likely to
respond well Rob as you probably know
Israel has chosen not to turn up itself
uh at these oral hearings this is quite
unprecedented the the the magnitude of
this hearing people will know that 20
years ago there was an advisory opinion
offered regarding the wall uh that
Israel has constructed illegally inside
the occupied Palestinian territories at
that hearing 20 years ago you had 15
states show up for the oral uh arguments
which is what is happening this week and
next Monday this time around it's more
than 50 States this is the the most that
have ever been at any hearing of any
case before the international court of
justice in the ha in history but Israel
is not going there now we saw the uh
shellacking the quite significant
crushing defeat Israel took uh in its
case uh when South Africa brought Israel
to the court still being considered with
regard to plausible violations of the
genocide convention so Israel will have
others make its case for it of the 50
who are going to be there less than 10
are going to be siding with Israeli kind
of arguments the US uh primarily amongst
them what they will be arguing I imagine
and we've seen this in their written
submissions is the court should keep its
nose out of this it's not admissible
it's not justiciable and crucially that
this is an issue that should be decided
in negotiations it's political it's not
legal why is that so
important because the question here is
whether the peace process 30 years of
agreements under which Israel has just
entrenched its occupation its control
its apartheid is the peace process
something that should be Untouched by
International legality international law
and the peace process are two things
that should never meet this is the
Israel argument that allows you then to
have a peace process and we're hearing
now a lot of talk especially from the US
and from others that there's going to be
a new attempt to revive Oslo to revive
this peace process and I think what
they're telling us is the peace process
should be an action of asymmetry where a
powerful party can bully another party
with its external allies can force it to
accept things that are illegal under
international law and what this case is
doing is trying to ring fence and
suggest that any peace effort has to run
according to international law and
should not be an effort in simply
recrystallizing and formalizing the
existing apartheid reality in the cases
that we heard this morning the the
rulings of excuse me the the
representations that were made this
morning at the icg uh Israel was being
referred to as an occupying power now I
just I want to ask you about that but I
just think it's worth running through
the obligations that an occupying power
uh has under certain circumstances in
this case it says the occupied territory
must be administered for the benefit of
the local population in this case
Palestinians but Israel enforces
discriminatory laws and policies
subjecting Palestinians even children to
military rather than civilian courts the
laws state public order and safety must
be ensured however armed settler attacks
are at record levels Israel must not
displace the local population or move
its own civilians into the territory but
an estimated 750,000 Israeli settlers
inhabit about 300 settlements in the
occupied West Bank and East Jerusalem
the occupying power is also forbidden
from enforcing Collective punishment on
the local population but Israel
routinely destroys infrastructure it
demolishes homes and it digs up roads So
Daniel I want to come back to you given
all of that um over the years that has
been this intensification of int Israeli
control in uh particularly occupied West
Bank and also in uh occupied East
Jerusalem um why has there been that
intensification over the years when from
from a from somebody from the point of
view of somebody looking at it from
outside it would seem that uh removing a
lot of those obstacles making things
actually easier for Palestinians would
have provided some sort of roote to some
sort if not a two-state solution then at
least some sort of calming of the
situation well indeed you just offered
us the list of things that Israel is in
violation of every single one of them
that was the argument made uh this
morning in the court by the Palestinian
representation it's an argument you will
have in various guises repeated by many
of the states that will make uh oral
presentations over the coming days and
it's there in their written submissions
the court will hear all the major
structural issues self-determination
annexation illegal occupation settlement
status of Jerusalem and crucially
discrimination uh because 22 of the
states there 24 or if you include the
regional groupings have referenced
apartheid either in terms of the
violations of the convention uh against
all forms of racial discrimination or
the apartheid convention itself so it's
precisely the fact that international
law has not been applied that Israel has
been treated with impunity and no
accountability which has allowed us to
get to this horrific reality which has
been described which you described and
which we see every day on the ground for
Palestinians now here's where the
difficulty comes in Rob because as we
both know this is an advisory opinion
it's not enforceable it's not
self-enforcing so what does it mean the
idea I think is that not only do you
ring fence questions of international
legality but you also then dial up the
squirm Factor the embarrassment Factor
but also the legal complications for
third parties in terms of their
responsibilities and the consequences of
being complicit in this violation of
international law and in guaranteeing
impunity for the violating party namely
Israel now sometimes that may mean
things go to local courts we already saw
what happened after the South Africa
genocide initial provisional measures
ruling in the Netherlands and the court
there with regard to the provision of
arms other things I think whether it's
personal Criminal criminal liability
whether it's the relations they conduct
with Israel they the relations that
third States conduct with Israel's
illegal actions in the territories the
provision of arms to enact these illegal
policies I don't want to give a
polanish uh optimistic statement to
anyone that when in several months the
court makes its ruling Everything
Changes overnight but this gives
important tools potentially new tools
for what we all know is going to be a
long walk to freedom to dismantling a
parthe but one that will pass through by
necessity important moments of legal
iteration and around those crucial
mobilization of Civil Society actors of
consumers of legal bodies and ultimately
of State actors including the impressive
submissions and arguments that I think
we will hear from very important States
notably those in the global South and
notably those who have lived on under
aparte and colonization in the past
Daniel Levy we appreciate you being with
us in Al thank you very much indeed